# Exercising Patience and being an Active Listener

A quick word on tolerance and understanding as these are instrumental to your success in the below section.

Tolerance is the willingness to accept perspectives, ideas, and opinions that challenge your own. You are not required to understand or fully comprehend, rather you can hold two ideas in conflict with another at the same time. It doesn't threaten you, and it doesn't impact you. In its lightest form, tolerance is like hearing an accent. It's different from your own, you don't really understand why a word is pronounced a specific way, but you acknowledge that it can be pronounced differently than how you pronounce it.

Understanding is comprehension. You can follow or apply logic and reason to get at the background or root of what is occurring. It's less about agreement and more about validation. “I can see how you arrived at that conclusion.” “Okay, that reasoning makes sense.”  “I think this is what you’re saying, is that right?”  Again, it's not about agreement. Its acknowledgement that arises from comprehension.

## Patience

Patience is something we could all use more of. We’ve been taught to work efficiently, with velocity (this is the basis of Agile development after all - the measure of work completed within a duration) and this often creates tension because we rush, speak based on assumed like-knowledge, and run towards the outcome without consideration for the path we take.

Patience is not about slowing down, it is a skill that embodies tolerance and calm against adversity. That’s a lot to unpack and sounds pretty non-conformist and bohemian. Bear with me while we work through this concept.
Tolerance is the willingness to accept perspectives, ideas, and opinions that challenge your own. This is especially mentally taxing because you are forced to consider and weigh possibilities outside your experience - it is hard to reason about something you’ve never considered or been exposed to. It can be threatening when those challenges occur against concepts rooted in your identity or even topics and material where you have accumulated a wealth of knowledge on. Please note knowledge is evolutionary and constantly evolving, so it's important that we recognize and accept what we currently know may in fact be incorrect tomorrow, in a year, in a decade, or in another lifetime. Humans are wired to flee or fight when we perceive a threat, and individuals who challenge our preconceived notions, knowledge, and identity are computed as a threat by our brains. It is why when people are wrong on the internet you have an overwhelming urge to correct them. Considering that phrase alone - “correct them” -  we’ve shifted from the threatening content to the messenger presenting it. This is how we as humans think so in the practice of tolerance you must separate the individual from the idea.

So what about calm? Well this is where that separation I mentioned above can drop you into a calm. Your word choices matter way more than you realize. “You are wrong.” Here you’ve coupled the content to the individual and turned to blame. “You” is a strong word, it is isolating and empowering. From now on, you may only use “you” in a positive framing. For everything else “it”, “that”, and “this” are your go-tos for dealing with anything else. Wrong is an immediate negative, it's a strong negative, and while it is a synonym of incorrect, it bears a weight of morality and ethics that typically does not occur in most technology-related discussions (insert standard disclaimer about AI here, regardless of your opinion). Incorrect and not correct are both neutral and imply referenceable justification. Calm is neutral, by separating the individual from the topic, and using neutral language, you begin to embrace calm (even though you may secretly be seething). How you frame this within your mind is critical to maintaining a state of calm. It sounds simple, I assure you it is not. It will take practice, you will need to bite your tongue, count to ten, and breathe to reframe your thinking and achieve calm.

## Active listening

There are a number of articles online around active listening. Many of them will reference acknowledgement as being key here, things like “gotcha”, “understood”, or using body language (nodding your head, uncrossing your arms, leaning in, making eye contact). Yes these are important AND there is more.

Validation is important, asking open questions is critical, and reframing through reissuance is paramount.  Validation is not an agreement to what is being said, it is the acknowledgement of what someone is saying in your own words to express understanding and your capacity to empathize (not sympathize, there is nothing to pity here). And it's more than “I hear you”, it's “I understand you feel upset that the project was delayed.” You can only provide validation through reframing the problem and reissuing the problem back to the speaker in your own words. This helps create “translation pathways'' between you and all that you are  and your speaker (and all that they are).  Effectively it's your own key exchange or secret handshake protocol that you both establish and agree on.

Sandwich in between the actual validation and the reframing through reissuance is asking open questions. You must seek to understand, you cannot fake interest. You must be genuine or genuinely trying to understand how they arrived at the material and content that is so affronting. You are unique, and so is your speaker. You may share some experiences, but that does not guarantee you will understand every rationale they present so you must explore how it is formed and how it is based in order to actually understand and actively listen.

Throughout all of this you must also recognize the situation and learn to read the mood. Some people want to rage, they want to express emotion, they don't want answers, they just want to be heard. Others aren't aware of how they come across, how their behavior or ideas are received and need guidance.  Sometimes you need to flat out ask - would you like me to listen, to help, or both? Adjust your behavior accordingly, but consider your role and relationship with this person as you may be required to “help” even if they are not wanting of it.

### Help not-wanted

You may be in a position of authority that requires you to “help” or direct an individual even when they feel they do not need it or when they do not want it. There are a few ways that this can occur, and regardless of how you got there, inevitably you will become aware, either verbally or through body language that your assistance is not welcome.

How you proceed is important.  You must recognize what is going on that is driving the lack of welcome. This may involve digging in a little more, asking probing questions, or even giving the individual space and then coming back.  People generally have 3 different states of mind when it comes to receiving information:
Receptive - they are already open to receiving the information, they likely will not ask much if any questions beyond clarity for understanding or direction.  Consider individuals in this state as already “sold” or bought into whatever you are attempting to instruct, guide, or persuade them on.
Influenceable - These are individuals who have not yet made up their mind one way or another. They will either be quiet and reflective of the material presented or will ask a plethora of questions to help form their own opinion.
Shutdown - These are individuals who are dug into their position or views. They do not currently have an open mindset and may have a number of reasons that are preventing or obscuring their mood and perspective.

This is difficult to navigate, and the guidance I’m going to provide is a framework built from my own experience working with individuals through this kind of issue.

When people shut down they may need space to cool off. A lot of the time, they’re not feeling heard so scheduling a 30 minute session – when they are ready, to hear them, to actively listen is important. One of a few things can happen:  they can feel heard and the issue resolves itself, you may uncover something you need to take care of, or the “listening” session moves from cathartic to vampiric.

Understanding when cathartic listening becomes vampiric is difficult, particularly when it's obvious the person isn't interested in helping themselves. Relief through emotional expression (that's what cathartic means) allows people to rubber duck or work through how they experience something in the open. It forces them to put into words, ideas, and phrases things they have previously failed to convey. It may require probing on your part (leverage that active listening here).  It can be exhausting helping someone manage what they’re experiencing, its when this becomes a repeat that it begins to turn vampiric. Usually one or two "listening" sessions is perfectly fine. When just one listening session isn't enough, by the end of the second you’ll probably know that a third is on the horizon. You will feel drained and likely not look forward to it. It puts you in an off mood when you are not positioned to be your best. Be mindful of that. You may find you are dragged more into the discussion based on statements they make, feeling a need to push back or explain, it can begin to feel like they are drawing it out.  There isn't a single solution, you kind of need to get a feel for the person and be candid.  

Keep in mind these sessions must be kept to 30 minutes, however if there is a genuine problem these will likely run over and you may be able to detect it fairly quickly and can handle that with your existing means. But if there isnt a genuine problem, and the second session is vampiric, you need to schedule a third session. Here you will take control of the discussion because past sessions are not effective.  What does this look like? 

“Hey Pat, we've discussed this particular issue on two previous occasions. It doesn't appear that this is being resolved on its own, so let's have you do the following things.  You may not agree with everything, or particularly relish the direction, but it's important that we get past this as it's negatively influencing you in a way that is impacting your happiness and satisfaction with work.  Here's what I need you to do, and here's why.”

This does a few things. It restates the current environment of what has transpired (we've discussed this particular issue on two previous occasions). It shows that past techniques are not working (It doesn't appear that this is being resolved on its own,), and it removes their choice ( so let's have you do the following things).  

When someone is shut down, choices give them space to seek alternatives which can be inhibiting to their growth.  It's like a parent asking a child if they want to clean their bedroom or dust the house. The kid will usually throw a tantrum and say they don't want to do either, or they'll engage in negotiations with the parent. By removing the choice, and presenting it in a way that is less forward (lets have you do…) it gives them a sense of partnership, regardless if they want it or not. 

You've also explained that you anticipate they will not be thrilled with the direction - you're acknowledging their feeling and perception ( You may not agree with everything, or particularly relish the direction,). This validates their experience. It doesn't mean you agree with them, rather that you show comprehension and understanding for what they feel. You've also acknowledged its impact on them and their work that can resonate (negatively influencing you in a way that is impacting your happiness and satisfaction with work.). 

People do not want to be unhappy with their work, they do not want to feel like they are working for nothing. Reframing the problem through its impact on their feelings, after acknowledging their feelings is a method to build rapport with that team member. You’re also offering reasoning. Be careful here, too detailed gives them something to grab and fight against, keep it succinct and make sure you cover: current situation, task to be complete, desired action, target result. It should be simple and show how one feeds the other.

Now you may go through this, and the individual does not improve or they continue to shut down. At this point, it becomes a management challenge and I would refer you to your internal management practices.
